desired features (in no particular order):
    afpd:
        return the right version-specific error codes
        honor the readonly/deleteinhibit/renameinhibit/copyprotect bits.
        via a database (that handles ro media, -db <path>):
        	Add afp_fileid capabilities - done
        	Add afp_catalogue
		afp_enumerate optimization
        server messages in useful places 
	change afp/ddp child handling to be in line w/ generic?
        administrative control program (using asip API?)
	appledouble v2 (gets us persistent DIDs). we'll need a did
	        database for non-hfs volumes. i think mmapping a
	        bitmap with dids at the root level should work.
		also, v2 gets us much better prodos support and
		provides for shortname support. - done 
	various toggles to afpd.conf (-timeout, etc.)
	figure out more ways of optimizing things. current places
	        of interest:
		1) reading/writing. currently there's character 
		   replacement. we should have a better way of doing
		   it that speeds things up the no-replacement case.
		   i've already done that for the crlf case.
		2) use of mmap where appropriate. NOTE: this will only
                   be a win if we mmap heavily used files. likely
		   candidates include file-based databases. mmapping 
		   header files is actually pretty slow under linux.
		3) change lookup algorithms where appropriate. 
	ability to interact with hfs desktop databases (either by
	        changing hfs or changing afpd).
        utmp/wtmp support
		
    papd:
	DHX authenticated printing logins (does a real Appleshare server
		do this?)
	Change to samba-style config file.	 

    autoconf/automake system:
	Need to separate out the flags and libraries for different
		applications, so that we aren't having them all linked with
		every library, etc.
        
things to fix:
        cleaner separation of layers.
	AFP <-> Unix permissions. there are a couple cases where they 
		don't map perfectly. in particular, gid == 0 means
		ignore group permissions while uid == 0 means anybody
                can fiddle with this file. in addition, we need to be
		able to still change permissions on a directory with u-a
		set. finally, we need to adjust the offspring count
		for directories based upon what permissions they
		have. i.e., search -> can see directories. 
		            read -> can see files.
		we need to map permissions so that these semantics get
                followed.
        support picking up items from dropboxes without linux-side superuser
                intervention
        support for system-wide messages; send the main afpd process SIGUSR2
                and each of the children should send out the same message.
        replacement of a linefeed with the appropriate Macintosh character in
                server messaging (currently replaces with a space)

added features:
	sped up of_findname and of_dealloc.
        nfs quota support
	solaris beta STREAMS driver added.
	64-bit cleanup
	cleaner startup/takedown
        added debug messages to dsi_write areas.
	fixed server info unexpected disconnects (due to OT bug).
        afp/ddp and afp/tcp cohabitation. afp/ddp and afp/tcp can
	operate separately now (-T turns off tcp, -D turns off ddp).
	incorporated the netbsd patches 
		[source: wrstuden@loki.stanford.edu (Bill Studenmund)]
	casefolding on a per volume basis.
	added "generic" platform support for AFP/tcp.
	:ETCDIR:/afppasswd file for randnum passwds
	AppleVolumes variable substitions
    	atalkd: zones on single interfaces and the ability to control
		which interfaces get routes between them.
	papd:	cleartext and noauth logins using Print Server Security
		Protocol
		CAP-style authenticated printing
		fixed errors when spooling to lpr 0.46 queue
